OIDC w/ Entra ID (#1966)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/user-management/saml-sso/palette-sso-with-entra-id.md

OpenID Connect (OIDC) lets developers authenticate users across websites and apps without owning and managing password files. This technology allows Palette to verify the identity of the person currently using the browser or application.

In October 2023, Microsoft renamed [Azure Active Directory](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/fundamentals/new-name) to Microsoft Entra ID. For the purposes of this guide, please consider Microsoft Entra ID and Azure Active Directory to be synonymous. Microsoft Entra ID securely manages anything to do with the user's information, access, and the trust relationships between parties in a flow. It authenticates the user's identity, grants, and revokes access to resources, and issues tokens.

This document will guide you on how to deploy and enabling SSO with Microsoft Entra based on OpenID Connect for integration with Palette and Kubernetes clusters. 

:::tip

If you want to enable OIDC at the Kubernetes cluster level, refer to the [Enable OIDC in Kubernetes Clusters](#enable-oidc-in-kubernetes-clusters) section.

:::

## Architecture

> 

Reviewer: @Jesse-Ben, can you add a high-level summary of what the image below depicts? It's odd to have an image without some accompanying text, especially when numbered.

    | Palette Team Name | Role    | Entra ID Group Name |
    |-------------------|---------| ------------------- |
    | `e3ac07cc-bd12-4edc-92a4-983d783153ba` |  Tenant Admin     |   `palette_tenant_admins` |
    | `88f61c49-1dd1-40c3-a820-68a513a38725` |  Project Admin   |   `palette_default_project_admins` |
    | `3f33c3a5-e0af-4ef6-9671-c7545fe264f3` |  No role assigned    |   `k8s_cluster_admins` |
    | `c4606295-e8b0-4df0-891b-de4428d7e54f` |  No role assigned   |  `k8s_cluster-editor` |

Refer to the images below to ensure you have the correct settings.

    ![Example of IDs](/oidc-entra-id-images/ba_tenantadmin.png)

    ![Example of IDs with Palette roles attached to a team](/oidc-entra-id-images/25_def_project_admin.png)

#### Palette SSO OIDC Configuration

23. Navigate to left **Main Menu**, select **Tenant Settings**. Next, click on **SSO** and select the **OIDC** tab. 

24. You will now configure the OIDC settings in Palette. Use the table below as a reference and populate the fields with the information you saved from the previous steps.

| Field| Description |
|------|-------------|

> | **Issuer URL**        | Add your tenant URL. The tenant URL looks like the following but with your unique tenant ID at the end `https://sts.windows.net/xxxxxxx`|

Reviewer 2: Per Microsoft Entra's [documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/v2-protocols-oidc#find-your-apps-openid-configuration-document-uri), you are supposed to query the well-known Open ID configuration document API to determine the issuer url.
E.g.
```bash
curl -s https://login.microsoftonline.com/7fc4bd49-b7eb-410f-8ad4-11ab94561548/v2.0/.well-known/openid-configuration | jq '.issuer'
"https://login.microsoftonline.com/7fc4bd49-b7eb-410f-8ad4-11ab94561548/v2.0"
```

[Enable OIDC in Kubernetes Clusters](#enable-oidc-in-kubernetes-clusters) section.

:::

## Enable OIDC SSO in Palette

Use the following steps to enable OIDC SSO in Palette with Microsoft Entra ID.

### Prerequisites

- Palette or Palette VerteX version 4.0.X or greater.

- A [Microsoft Entra ID](https://entra.microsoft.com/#home) subscription. You will need an account with one of the
  following roles: Global Administrator, Cloud Application Administrator, or Application Administrator. Alternatively,
  you may be the owner of the service principal.

- If you want to use the same Microsoft Entra ID application for OIDC-based SSO in your Kubernetes cluster itself, you
  need to install [kubelogin](https://github.com/int128/kubelogin) on your local workstation to handle retrieval of
  access tokens for your cluster.

### Configure Microsoft Entra ID with Palette

1.  Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a **Tenant Admin**.

2.  Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and select **Tenant Settings**. From the **Tenant Menu**, select **SSO**, then
    **Configure**, and lastly, click on the **OIDC** tab.

>     ![A view of the callback URL field](/oidc-entra-id-images/oidcallback.png)

Reviewer 3: Could we have this image a little bigger? :sweat_smile:

4.  In a separate browser tab, log in to the Microsoft Entra ID Admin console and open the
    [App registration blade](https://portal.azure.com/#blade/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade).

5.  Click on **New registration** and assign a name to the new registration. In this guide, the example app registration
    is named _palette_oidc_.

6.  Next, select **Web**, and paste the _Palette Callback URL_ value from your clipboard into the **Redirect URL
    (optional)** field, and Click **Register**.

    ![Azure application creation screen](/oidc-entra-id-images/palette-registration.png)

7.  From the app overview page, navigate to the left **Main Menu** and select **Certificates & secrets**. In the
    following screen, click on **New client secret**.

8.  Add a description for the secret and select an expiration period. Click on **Add** to create the secret.

    :::warning

    We recommend you store the secret value in a secure location, such as a password manager. You will need this value
    later when you configure Palette.

    :::

9.  From the application overview page, navigate to the left **Main Menu** and select **Token configuration**.

> 10. Select **Add optional claim** button. Choose **Token type** as **ID**, and add the claims **email** and

Reviewer 2: To support Entra v2 tokens, you'll also need to add the following optional claims: `family_name` and `given_name`.

    **preferred_username**. When finished, click the **Add** button.

    ![Add a claim button](/oidc-entra-id-images/twooptionalclaims.png)

11. In addition to allowing individual user authentication, Palette provides group claim functionality, allowing an
    OpenID Connect identity provider, like Microsoft Entra ID, to identify the user's Entra ID group membership within
    Palette. To enable group membership, select the **Add groups claim** button. Then select **Security groups**, and
    **Group ID** for each property: **ID**, **Access** and **SAML**.

>     ![Groups and inviduals can be assigned a group membership in Azure](/oidc-entra-id-images/groupsclaim.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Groups and individuals can be assigned a group membership in Azure](/oidc-entra-id-images/groupsclaim.png)
```

    | `88f61c49-1dd1-40c3-a820-68a513a38725`  | `palette_default_project_admins` |
    | `3f33c3a5-e0af-4ef6-9671-c7545fe264f3`  | `k8s_cluster_admins`             |
    | `c4606295-e8b0-4df0-891b-de4428d7e54f`  | `k8s_cluster-editor`             |

22. Assign the following **Roles** to each Palette team. For example purposes, the same Entra Group ID values used in
    the table above are used in the table below.

    | Palette Team Name                      | Role             | Entra ID Group Name              |
    | -------------------------------------- | ---------------- | -------------------------------- |
    | `e3ac07cc-bd12-4edc-92a4-983d783153ba` | Tenant Admin     | `palette_tenant_admins`          |
    | `88f61c49-1dd1-40c3-a820-68a513a38725` | Project Admin    | `palette_default_project_admins` |
    | `3f33c3a5-e0af-4ef6-9671-c7545fe264f3` | No role assigned | `k8s_cluster_admins`             |
    | `c4606295-e8b0-4df0-891b-de4428d7e54f` | No role assigned | `k8s_cluster-editor`             |

    Refer to the images below to ensure you have the correct settings.

    ![Example of IDs](/oidc-entra-id-images/ba_tenantadmin.png)

>     ![Example of IDs with Palette roles attached to a team](/oidc-entra-id-images/25_def_project_admin.png)

Reviewer 3: The Project Admin email is visible.

    | ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
    | **Issuer URL**    | Add your tenant URL. The tenant URL looks like the following but with your unique tenant ID at the end `https://sts.windows.net/[**Directory (tenant) ID**]`                                                                 |
    | **Client ID**     | The application ID from Entra ID                                                                                                                                                                                             |
    | **Client Secret** | The application secret you created                                                                                                                                                                                           |

>     | **Default Teams** | Leave blank if you don't want users without group claims to be assigned to a default group. If you do, enter the desired default group name. If you use this option, be careful with how much access you assign to the group |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    | **Default Teams** | Leave it blank if you don't want users without group claims to be assigned to a default group. If you do, enter the desired default group name. If you use this option, be careful with how much access you assign to the group |
```

25. Leave other fields with the default values and click **Enable**. If all required values are provided, you will
    receive a message stating that OIDC is configured successfully.

    ![Example of Palette with populated input fields](/oidc-entra-id-images/enable.png)

You have now successfully configured OIDC SSO in Palette. Next, validate the configuration by logging in to Palette with
an Entra ID user account.

### Validate

1. Log out of Palette. To log out, click on **User Menu** in the top right corner of the screen and select **Sign Out**.

2. The Palette login screen now displays a **Sign in** button and no longer presents a username and password field. If
   this is your first time logging in with SSO, you will be redirected to the Entra ID login page. Depending on your
   organization's SSO settings, this could be a simple login form or require MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication). Make
   sure you log in as a user who is a member of the `palette-tenant-admins` group in Entra ID. Once authenticated, you
   will automatically be redirected back to Palette and logged into Palette as that user.

> 3. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and ensure the **Tenant Settings** option is available. If you do not see the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and ensure the **Tenant Settings** option is available. If you do not visualize the
```

> 3. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and ensure the **Tenant Settings** option is available. If you do not see the
>    **Tenant Settings** option, you are not logged in as a user who is a member of the `palette-tenant-admins` group in
>    Entra ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and ensure the **Tenant Settings** option is available. If the **Tenant Settings** option is not available, then you are not logged in as a user who is a member of the `palette-tenant-admins` group in
   Entra ID.
```

   :::tip

   Below the **Sign In** button, there is a link titled **SSO issues? --> Use your password**. The link can be used to
   bypass SSO and log in with a local Palette account in case there is an issue with SSO and you need to access Palette
   without SSO.

   :::

## Enable OIDC in Kubernetes Clusters With Entra ID

> Kubelogin is a kubectl plugin for Kubernetes OpenID Connect (OIDC) authentication. When you use kubectl, kubelogin opens

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubelogin is a kubectl plugin for Kubernetes OIDC authentication. When you use kubectl, kubelogin opens
```

up your browser, starts a session, and redirects you to your IDP's login site. Upon a succesfull login, you receive an
authentication token that is used to grant you access to the cluster.

> In the following diagram, Entra ID is the IDP. Once Kubelogin gets a token from Entra ID or similar IDP, you can then

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following diagram, Entra ID is the IDP. Once kubelogin gets a token from Entra ID or similar IDP, you can then
```

use kubectl to access the Kubernetes cluster API.

>     ![Palette and EntraID](/oidc-entra-id-images/PalettewEntraID.png)

Reviewer 3: Hi Jesse :) Would it be possible to create a diagram of our own? We may have problems using this one because of Microsoft image rights. :disappointed:

   | **oidc-client-secret** | The client secret for the OIDC provider. This is the client secret that will be used to authenticate to the OIDC provider |
   | **oidc-extra-scope**   | The scope tags                                                                                                            |

   ```yaml hideClipboard
   clientConfig:
     oidc-issuer-url: "{{ .spectro.pack.kubernetes.kubeadmconfig.apiServer.extraArgs.oidc-issuer-url }}"
     oidc-client-id: "{{ .spectro.pack.kubernetes.kubeadmconfig.apiServer.extraArgs.oidc-client-id }}"
     oidc-client-secret: "**************************"
     oidc-extra-scope: "profile,email"
   ```

7. Complete the remaining steps to create the cluster profile. Once you have specified the container network interface
   and the storage container interface, select **Add New Pack** to add the RBAC addon pack.

8. Select the **Spectro RBAC** from the **Public Repo** or the **Palette Registry**.

9. Select the latest version and click on the **Values** button to modify the pack YAML values.

10. Navigate to the `clusterRoleBindings` section of the pack layer. For Entra ID integration with RBAC, edit your RBAC

>     pack values to match the YAML snippet below. Or, copy and paste the entire block to your RBAC pack and modify you

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    pack values to match the YAML snippet below. Alternatively, copy and paste the entire block to your RBAC pack and modify you
```

    groups you created in the previous steps. Members of the Entra ID group will be assigned the corresponding
    Kubernetes role. For example, members of the Entra ID group `k8s_cluster_admins` will be assigned the Kubernetes
    role `cluster-admin`. You can change the YAML and use _roleBindings_ to assign roles to specific namespaces versus
    using a _clusterRoleBinding_ to assign roles to the entire cluster.

11. Click on **Confirm & Create** to proceed with the cluster profile creation. Click on **Next** to proceed to the
    **Review** step.

12. Review the cluster profile settings and click on **Finish Configuration** to create the cluster profile.

You now have a cluster profile that will use Entra ID SSO authentication to access a Kubernetes cluster. You can now
create a cluster using this profile. You will be redirected to the Entra ID login page when you log in to the cluster.
Depending on your organization's SSO settings, this could be a simple login form or require MFA (Multi-Factor
Authentication).

### Validate

You can validate the Entra ID SSO integration by deploying a Kubernetes cluster with the cluster profile you created in

> the previous steps. Once the cluster is deployed, you can log in to the cluster by using kubectl with the kube-login

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the previous steps. Once the cluster is deployed, you can log in to the cluster by using kubectl with the kubelogin
```

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a user who is a member of one of the Entra ID groups you
   created in the previous steps.

2. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and select **Clusters**.

3. Deploy a cluster using the cluster profile you created in the previous steps. Check out the tutorial
   [Deploy a Cluster](../../clusters/public-cloud/deploy-k8s-cluster.md) for detailed guidance on how to deploy a
   cluster.

4. Once the cluster is deployed, select the cluster from the cluster list view to access the cluster details page.

5. Download the kubeconfig file for the cluster.

6. Configure kubectl to use the kubeconfig file you downloaded in the previous step. Refer to the
   [Configure kubectl](../../clusters/cluster-management/palette-webctl.md) documentation for detailed guidance on how
   to configure kubectl.

7. Issue a kubectl command to access the cluster. For example, you can issue the following command to view the nodes in
   the cluster.

   ```shell
   kubectl get pods --all-namespaces
   ```

8. You will be redirected to the Entra ID login page. Depending on your organization's SSO settings, this could be a

>    simple login form or require MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   simple login form or require MFA.
```

>    simple login form or require MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   simple login form or require Multi-Factor Authentication.
```
